[00:00:00 - 00:00:56] So, you've mastered commerce and the economy. You understand the UI. And you get how populations work. But let's be honest, you're playing a paradox game here. You want to learn how to wage war. Hello everyone. I am Benjamin Magnus, and as before, I am joined today by little Loris, and we are going to be breaking down the core mechanics of the military and expansion in EU5. So, without further ado, what do you need to know about the military and war? Let's go through some basic training here.

[00:00:29 - 00:01:27] We'll start with a really brief breakdown of how a battle actually unfolds in the game. When hostile armies meet in a physical location on the map, a battle will ensue. Each battle is made up of four sections: left, center, right, and reserve. At the start of a battle, there'll be a 5-hour bombardment phase where any artillery will have an opportunity to damage enemy units. Once that is complete, the three fronts will engage. Any units in reserve will attempt to move to reinforce a weak

[00:00:57 - 00:01:51] front. Every tick, all of the stats on an army will be added up, aggregated with a dice roll, and that will dictate how much damage is done to the enemy and to you. A front will collapse if it runs out of manpower or morale, and units on the opposing side of a collapsed front will get the opportunity to flank the next front. So, if you collapse the enemy's right front, your units will be able to flank the center. A battle is concluded when an army is wiped out to the man, retreats from the battlefield,

[00:01:24 - 00:02:15] or if their morale collapses, they will route. Armies standing on enemy locations will attempt to siege them down and occupy them. Results of battles, occupation, and a couple of other factors will contribute to your war score, which you can then use to dictate terms during a peace deal. Super simple, right? On its face, there's a number of moving pieces, but it's all fairly straightforward. Underneath the hood, there's a lot of stats and modifiers that are changing the outcomes of these battles. What you're trying to

[00:01:50 - 00:02:45] do is stack up as many positive modifiers for yourself and bring them to bear against an enemy with less modifiers. Some of those positives you're stacking up could be more troops, higher quality troops, better unit composition and synergy, outmaneuvering your enemy to create battlefield advantages, or having a better general. Furthermore, the game takes place over a 500year stretch of time from the late medieval period to post NPoleonic warfare. Before we get too much further, let's actually take a look at the units

[00:02:17 - 00:03:15] we'll be using. Now, we've discussed levies before in a previous tutorial and describe them as raised peasant levies, which is broadly true for a lot of the world, but is not 100% accurate. If we go into our leveies here and take a look at the individual locations that are informing them, you can see the breakdown of where those leveies are coming from. Our peasants are providing a huge amount of wars, but our nobles are also providing mailed knights. In this, the pops in your nation are

[00:02:46 - 00:03:45] informing what your military will look like. A large amount of nobles will provide a larger amount of mailed knights. That also means that having a unit wiped out in battle or from attrition will remove those pops from those locations. You could easily find yourself in a situation where you have wiped out an entire societal class in a bad battle. Think of it as a puric victory. You may be winning on the battlefield, but you could also be wiping out an entire generation of pops. One more important piece of information

[00:03:15 - 00:04:13] that you should be aware of is how these numbers are being generated. Here we could see that nominally 3% of our peasants are being levied as warbos that is then being modified by our control in the location and policies and laws. You can see we're having a large negative modifier from lack of control in the region. If we would like more levies, we need to increase control. Furthermore, different types of pops levy at different rates. While we have far fewer nobles in our land, we can levy 10% of

[00:03:44 - 00:04:42] them as opposed to three. Our burgers can be levied at a 5% rate and our clerics at a lowly two. Moving on from levies, we also have our regulars and we have our mercenaries. Mercenaries are broadly similar to regulars, but they cost more money but do not cost manpower. If we would like to recruit some more regulars, we can just click the button and we are provided with a list of regulars that we have available to us right now. Your regulars are broadly broken up into four different types. Infantry, cavalry, auxiliaries,

[00:04:14 - 00:05:04] and cannons, which we don't see on the list here because it's a little too early in the game for that. You'll also see that we have multiple unit types in each category. We have footmen and archers for infantry. And we have three different types of horsemen. Each of these units has different unit sizes, different unit modifiers, and different unit costs. And when I say costs, I don't just mean the cost in duckets. If we hover over any of these, you can see that we also have a maintenance cost.

[00:04:39 - 00:05:31] Every month, these footmen require weapons and leather in addition to manpower. If we take a look at our armored horsemen here, we can see that we need leather, weapons, cloth, horses, and tools in addition to manpower. So, building a professional army will also be dictated by what resources you have available to you. Are you producing them locally or are you trading for them? And if you are trading for them, are those trade routes vulnerable to attack by an enemy? If you have a large cavalry army

[00:05:05 - 00:06:00] and the enemy reduces your ability to supply them with horses, you will fight less effectively. I do want to spend a second here talking about our auxiliaries. There is one main difference between the rest of the units and the auxiliaries, and that is logistics. Think of the auxiliaries as non-combat personnel. They can fight, but they won't do a very good job of it. The two stats that are important are how much food that they can carry and how much food that they can consume. You can see they carry way more food than they

[00:05:32 - 00:06:23] consume. If we take a look at any of the other units, they carry and consume the same amount of food. So, these guys will always carry one month worth of food on them. The auxiliaries will carry more food for the entire army, which will allow you to operate further from your supply depot. Let's take a look at some of the differences between these units by checking out their modifiers. Footmen have a modifier that reduces the amount of damage taken to them, which means that they are losing less men physically

[00:05:58 - 00:06:56] on the battlefield. If we take a look at our archers here, we can see we have a high initiative, but we take more morale damage and we take more strength damage, which means they won't have the staying power of footmen on the battlefield, but they do have a high initiative. Initiative will go handinand with combat speed and ties back to what we were talking about with reinforcements. Combat speed dictates how quickly a unit can move from reinforcements to a front. An initiative will dictate how likely it

[00:06:27 - 00:07:22] is that that unit will actually make it into combat. A unit with a low initiative might actually make it to a front, but then end up sitting behind the lines watching their friends die, taking morale damage. We could actually see that in practice if we zoom in on our little battle over here. This unit of 1,000 levies have made it from the reserves to a front, but they are not actively engaged yet. They're currently waiting for enough people to die so that enough frontage is opened up for them to

[00:06:54 - 00:07:47] move forward. But with a low initiative, once that frontage opens up, they may end up sitting there waiting for an opportunity to arise. That entire time they're taking morale damage. This is a long-winded way of saying that units with low initiative could easily find themselves waiting to reinforce into a battlefield, but then routing because they've watched so many people die before they were able to actually engage in combat. So units with high combat speed and high initiative work well in a

[00:07:21 - 00:08:13] reserve position. In this case, it might not be a bad idea to have some archers waiting in reserve in case your footmen need a little help. Hovering over any of these units will show you the full list of modifiers that they're working with and their stats. You can see that our hobblars here even have a couple of combat advantages when fighting in hills, woods, and forests. Another important thing to talk about is frontage here. We mentioned frontage before when we were looking at our little battle. The hobblers are made up

[00:07:46 - 00:08:44] of 50 men, and they take up one unit of frontage. Our footmen are made up of 100 men and take up one unit of frontage. These leveies are 1,000 men and take up 0.75 units of frontage. This means you'll be able to stack different amounts of men in the same amount of frontage. A professional army will fight much smaller but more efficiently. You'll be able to bring a large amount of levies to the front, but you might not be able to fight very effectively with them just because they have poorer

[00:08:16 - 00:09:08] combat stats. At the end of the day, what's important to remember is that what units you put on what area do matter. Fast units with small frontage will work really well as reserve units because they'll be able to reach areas that are in need quicker. And if their frontage stat is relatively small, they won't have to wait as long for as many men to die to free up frontage to be able to reinforce. One other thing to keep in mind when we're discussing unit size is that these are not entirely

[00:08:42 - 00:09:33] static. They will change as the game progresses. When you unlock new advancements and new unit types, you'll be able to field more men on the field in the same amount of frontage. And this is where the balance starts to change between how useful a levey is in combat. Right now, a thousand leveies may take up the exact same amount of frontage as a 100 footmen, but as those footmen become more efficient and you have 200, 300, 400, 500 men and the exact same amount of frontage, those leveies will

[00:09:08 - 00:10:05] conversely be less powerful. So, we looked a little bit at individual unit stats, which will be aggregated together to dictate how much attack power or defensive power a unit has on a front. But there are also global modifiers that we can find here. Over on the right here, we have infantry, cavalry, artillery, and auxiliary power. These are straight modifiers that will increase the amount of damage by a percentage that is being done by units of that category. Military taxes is a defensive modifier and will reduce

[00:09:36 - 00:10:31] incoming damage. Discipline will modify how much damage you do and how much damage you take. Very important. Army morale dictates how long your men can stick to the battlefield before routing. Army experience again reduces the amount of damage taken in battle and army tradition is more of a global modifier. You can see here that higher levels of army tradition are giving our armies greater bonuses. It is also moving our societal value towards land. That's an important thing to keep in mind. Heavily

[00:10:04 - 00:10:59] engaging in a land war will have a tendency to push your nation towards the land societal value. And conversely, heavily engaging in a lot of naval action will push it the other way towards the naval societal value. These things can have an effect on how your economy is run. So keep an eye on it. And on the Navy tab here, we have a similar list of modifiers. Power for galleys, light ships, heavy ships, and transports. Navy tradition, Navy experience, Navy morale, Navy damage, and naval range, which dictates how far

[00:10:31 - 00:11:22] from home waters your navies can actually operate. Let's zoom ahead into the future and take a look at the Kingdom of Portugal. We have a small standing army of 10,000 men here. Why don't we use them to declare a small war? Before we do that though, there's a couple things I want to go over because this UI has a lot of stuff in it. One of the first things you may notice is that we have different unit types. Now, we have hellbers, we have archabuses, supply convoys, different types of

[00:10:57 - 00:11:52] lancers, and down here at the bottom, many, many of those lovely cannons we were talking about. And you also might notice that the unit sizes have increased as well. [music] These haladers are now 400 men, where our frontline infantry were 100 before. If we take a look at their stat panels, some of this information is broadly the same. The battle statistics have not really changed, and that's because we're simply stacking more men into the same amount of frontage, thus giving us more power. 400 men with the same battle

[00:11:24 - 00:12:14] stats will do way more damage than 100 men. If we take a look at our archabuses here, you can see that they're rather squishy, but they have very good initiative, so they're kind of taking the place of our old long bowman. Next, let's take a look at our frontage here. It's unevenly distributed. We have way too many men stacked on the center and not enough on the left. You can see here that our frontage usage is 16 of 10, which means a number of units would end up sitting in reserve taking morale

[00:11:50 - 00:12:37] damage. Now, if you would like to manually set up your army for a specific composition, you could do that in the formation tab by simply clicking on all of the buttons that appear to move a unit to the left, right, center, or into the reserve by simply right-clicking. Let's take a couple units and move them over to the left flank just to even things out. Now, if you're in a pinch or you just like the AI to handle that for you, you can simply click this button right here, which will autobalance the

[00:12:13 - 00:13:01] fronts and try to even things out. Next, we have unit weight. If we click on this button right here, it'll open up the supply map mode for us. If we enter any location that has a supply limit less than our unit weight, we're likely to suffer some attrition. Next, we have our maintenance cost. This is how much duckets we're spending every month from the state treasury to maintain this army. If we dig down through the tool tips here, you can see that this number is being modified by the cost of goods

[00:12:37 - 00:13:32] in the market. So, if we could keep the cost of goods to maintain an army low, that will reduce this number. Now, there's a lot of buttons over here on the left. Most of them are extraordinarily self-explanatory, but there are a few that we'd like to go over. We already took a look at the balance unit button. You'll probably end up hitting this one a lot. Down here is your panic button. This will order a full shattered retreat of an army back to safety. The downside of that is that 50% of the men in that army will perish.

[00:13:05 - 00:13:58] It is a way to attempt to save half the army in dire situations. Next, we have scorched earth. This will tell an army to burn the food stock piles in a province, thus denying it to anybody else's use. It will also upset the population. The next two down are to create a supply depot and to deposit food in a supply depot. A supply depot can be manually created and food will be stored there for your army's use. Depositing food can be done by an army as well. It could be a good idea in some

[00:13:32 - 00:14:21] instances to create an army whose primary job is simply to shuttle food to forward supply depots. And down here at the bottom, we have the upgrade army, which will change an old unit type to a new unit type once you unlock it in the advancement tree. Drill an army, which will allow you to increase maintenance cost to gain some experience. Make available to hire, which will turn them into mercenaries. And finally, we have recruit to army. This is a quality of lay feature. When you click it, you'll

[00:13:56 - 00:14:49] be able to recruit new units and they will automerge into the army once they are done. Now, let's take a look at our general, specifically his stats and his abilities. You can see here that he has fairly good stats overall, but not only his military ability is affecting how he campaigns. His admin ability and diplo ability also give him military bonuses. And we also have his traits. Some characters will have positive or negative traits. This character is a defensive planner, which gives him a

[00:14:22 - 00:15:11] military tactics bonus. And finally, this little button scrolled away in the center of the UI at the top. Select an objective. This will allow you to automate an army. Send them on a task and have them just perform it. This is great for a number of situations. For instance, if you have those supply depots that need to be filled, but you don't want to do it manually, you can have an army set up to perform army logistics. Or if you're invading a country with vast swaths of territory, and you don't want to manually siege

[00:14:47 - 00:15:37] down every single location, you can automate an army and tell them to carpet siege. I think it's time that we declare a war. We have a weak little Castile above us here, so why don't we gobble up some more of their territory. One of the first things you might notice is that we don't have visibility on all of their territory. Terrain can block your view and give you some fog of war. This can be very important to keep an eye out. If say have to march through a mountain pass and you can't see what's on the

[00:15:12 - 00:16:03] other side, there might be a more powerful enemy army waiting for an ambush. The first thing we're going to do is march to an enemy castle so that we can take a look at how a siege works. Once an army is standing on a location that has a fort, a siege will commence. Now, the attacking army will have to have more men in it than the garrison of the fort. This fort only has 21 men in it, and we have an army of around 13,000. So, we'll be fine there. Once the siege is commenced, we'll get a

[00:15:37 - 00:16:34] progress bar. That's this guy right here. It is showing us how many days need to pass before the siege will progress. The base number on this is 30, but can be modified by a number of things in game. Currently, we have more offensive modifiers than they have defensive modifiers. So, our siege phases progress every 25 days instead of every 30. Faster is better here. At the end of every siege phase, what happens is a die is rolled, modifiers are added, and that total number will dictate how the siege progresses. If we hover over

[00:16:06 - 00:16:58] the number right here, we can see that in a breakdown. We have five different outcomes here that are all dependent on our aggregate score at the end of each siege phase. The dice roll plus the modifiers will give us what range we fall into. And then we have percentage chances to hit each of those ranges. For instance, if we roll badly, there'll be a supply shortage and the garrison will only lose 2% of its strength. If we roll fairly high and the defenders desert, they will lose 10% of their strength.

[00:16:32 - 00:17:26] But there is no situation currently where we can get them to surrender. That is a 0% chance of happening. Let's progress one tick and see where it lands. Rolling a 14 gave us an additional modifier, a plus one for having breached the walls. We also increased the siege accumulation. So now we have more positive modifiers that will affect the siege. Our percentage chance of success has gone from zero to 14%. There's now a chance on a fairly high roll that we will actually complete the siege. The next roll was lower, but

[00:16:59 - 00:17:56] still progressed the siege. So our percentage chance to take the fort has gone up. Another thing to note is that if you want to, you can order an assault on the fort. This will usually be extraordinarily costly in manpower, but it has the opportunity to take the fort quicker. We are now at a 57% chance of success. It is more likely than not that we will successfully take the fort on the next tick. And we have success. After 150 days, the garrison has succumbed and we have taken the fort. Something to note is that any location

[00:17:27 - 00:18:21] that does not have a fort in it will be taken in one siege tick. Now here we've engaged a Castellian army and there's one important thing that we would like to point out in this engagement and that is terrain advantage. Up here at the top of the battle report we can see our die rolls. We have rolled a three and they have rolled a one. Ours is red is because we have negative modifiers to our die rolls. We have three negative modifiers. One for the topography, one for the vegetation, and one for a

[00:17:54 - 00:18:51] river crossing. So we have taken a hefty negative -3 to all of our die rolls. This is where choosing your battlefields can be very beneficial. Whoever is the attacker in a location will get the negative modifiers that that location would impart. Because I attacked the Castellian army here, I am getting the negative modifiers. Now, the exception to this rule are forts. A fort placed at the top of a mountain in a forest location next to a river will have a lot of negative modifiers for any potential

[00:18:23 - 00:19:13] attackers. We even have a map mode to help you out with this, the tactical map mode. Bright green areas are completely neutral and the red areas give you a hefty plus three. Now that can go higher. This is plus three just for the terrain. River crossings would also change that. Now even though we had a negative three modifier on that battle, we still managed to pull out a victory partly because we just had more troops on the battlefield. But a big advantage for us was the fact that we had a lot of

[00:18:48 - 00:19:38] cannons. We had roughly the same amount of infantry, but our cannon advantage allowed us to impart many more casualties upon the Castilians. Now, because I'm a benevolent overlord, I don't think we want to completely wipe Castile off the map. We could easily do it, but let's take advantage of this situation and peace out the war right now while we have 64% war score. We can do this by simply clicking on the red seal. Now, what we want to do is negotiate a peace deal with the Castillians. The different tabs at the

[00:19:13 - 00:20:01] top here will give you different options that you can add to the treaty. For instance, we could force them to give us food or military access. We could revoke their cores. We could demand they dismantle forts, make them a vassel of some type, or simply take land. Now, if you want, you can click this button and we'll give you an entire province, or you can go for specific locations. Why don't we take about half their land for now? And if we shiftclick the little plus right here, we will take the

[00:19:37 - 00:20:36] maximum amount of money from their treasury. Now, this is a generous peace deal for the amount of war score we have, but it is just an example. If we ask for too much, they will deny our request. They have accepted the war is over. We have annexed the territory and we have taken their money. Now, our war was over fairly quickly, but one thing to keep in mind is that winter reduces food production and will increase attrition. Sieges also have a tendency to attract disease. Your army can suffer heavily

[00:20:06 - 00:21:03] from disease outbreaks while out on campaign. Additionally, an army that has contracted a disease can spread it to nearby locations. So, an army retreating back home could easily bring a plague with it. Another minor thing that could come up is that waterways can freeze in the winter. This can lock ships into regions and allow armies to transit areas they otherwise wouldn't be able to march over. But be careful for the thaw. When the ice starts to crack, you can suffer some pretty hefty casualties. Now

[00:20:35 - 00:21:26] that we've looked at our armies, let's take a brief look at our navies. The navies are also broken up into four different unit types. Galleys are primarily cheap early game warships, but they do have a number of distinct advantages. They take up less frontage than other ships, so you'll be able to stack more of them against an opposing fleet of heavier ships. All galleys also have bonuses to fighting in inland seas and narrows, but they suffer heavily out in the open ocean. So, a large fleet of

[00:21:00 - 00:21:53] galleys might be able to overcome some heavier warships if they're fighting to their advantage. Next, we have our light ships, which do have better combat stats than the galleys, but they take up more frontage, so it sort of evens out. Light ships, for the most part, are for economic purposes. You could use them as privateeers, to hunt privateeers, or to patrol your coastline to increase maritime presence. Next, we have our transports. While fairly weak in combat, their benefit is that they can transport

[00:21:26 - 00:22:22] more food and troops. Next, we have our heavy ships, which are our primary warships as the game progresses. These ships have much larger hole sizes and many more cannon, which allows them to sink a lot of damage and deal a lot of damage way more efficiently than any of the other ships. And of course, all of these ships will be using sailors from your sailor pool rather than soldiers from your manpower pool. They also have different maintenance needs. These heavy ships need naval supplies, cannons, rum,

[00:21:54 - 00:22:45] and salt. An important thing to keep in mind for your armies and your navies when it comes to maintenance is what happens if you fail to meet their needs. A damaged army needs to return to home territory, and a damaged navy needs to return to a port to repair and replenish losses. But if you do not have access to the supplies that a unit needs, it will not be able to recoup those losses. It'll be stuck at lower strength until you gain access to those supplies again. So talking about the Navy actually

[00:22:20 - 00:23:10] reminds me of the next way that you can choose to expand, and that's through colonization. You can engage in exploration through the geopolitics tab, and it is simply an investment in time and money. You can see here we currently have a character exploring the Amazon area. We have a list of modifiers that are informing how quickly it's progressing and that is being compared to the cost. You can see that this exploration will be done in about a year. If we would like to send off another one, we can absolutely do

[00:22:46 - 00:23:32] that. The first thing we need to do is to tell them where to start out from and that's going to be Silla for us. Now, we also need to tell them who we're going to send. This gentleman right here is not too bad of a choice. He's a ctographer, so he will explore cheaper, but he will take a little bit longer. Let's use him first. It'll take a little time to gather the characters and the supplies needed to complete the exploration and then they will head out into the world and attempt to find what

[00:23:09 - 00:23:58] is out there. Our explorer has returned. And if we take a look at the Amazon, you can see we can now see inland and have access to the locations that he was exploring. An important thing to remember though is that you do have to explore the coastline before you can explore inland. You need to find the land before you can then explore the land. Now, if you'd like to do more exploration, you might think it's a good idea to start exploring from a closer location. But the issue is is that the

[00:23:33 - 00:24:20] start of the exploration requires you to gather supplies for the exploration to continue. If that location on the frontier doesn't have access to those supplies, then the exploration won't be able to launch. So, starting explorations from markets where you have access to the appropriate resources is important. Here we have an exploration. We attempted to start from the frontier, but we don't have access to the right supplies. It's stalled. Why don't we go ahead and start a new colony in the area

[00:23:57 - 00:24:50] we just found? The locations in this area will be listed. If we try to colonize areas with a lower indigenous population, the cost will be lower. And if we try to colonize an area that we already have an adjacent colony to, that will reduce the cost as well. The next thing you need to do is select the province from which the colony's population will be drawn. Selecting an area with a higher population will increase the development speed of the colony. But you may find yourself in a situation where you would like a

[00:24:23 - 00:25:11] specific pop from a specific region to be part of your colony. One thing you may notice is that this colony right here is far cheaper than this colony right here. And that's because the cost of the colonies actually scales. The more colonies you have, the more expensive they will be. You can have as many colonies growing as you have pops and money to fund them. Now that the colony has started, it's simply a matter of time for enough pops to migrate and for the colony to complete. The colony

[00:24:48 - 00:25:34] will attempt to keep filling out locations until an entire province has been colonized. If we take a look a little bit further north, we can see that we actually have many other colonies already going. These are a little different, though, because they're much more mature. Once a colony is large enough, it will turn into a colonial nation. You'll have a couple options about what to do with it. You could even continue playing the game as your new colonial nation if you so choose. The new colonial nations will be

[00:25:11 - 00:26:05] your subjects. And with that comes all of the benefits. Straight up taxes are not the only reason you might want a colonial nation, though. A lot of times it will be access to goods. These new areas might give us access to new RGOs's, our resource gathering operations. Here in Cuba, you can see our colonial nation is giving us access to chili, chocolate, maze, and tobacco. All things that we didn't have access to in the old world. These goods can be developed, traded back to our home markets, and then utilized. The

[00:25:38 - 00:26:41] requirements for the new colonial locations to flip to your ownership is 1,000 of your pops in the location or 51% of the population needs to be of your culture. That is why high population areas are more expensive to colonize. You need to have more than half of the population of your culture before it flips to you. So, the location with only 343 people living in it will be fairly quick and cheap to colonize. The location with 21,000 will be much more expensive. It is worth noting that multiple nations can attempt to colonize

[00:26:09 - 00:26:59] the same location. That would mean pops of multiple cultures would be migrating into the colony at the same time. The nation that wins the location would be the one that would be able to get 51% of the total population of their culture in there before the other. One important note about colonies is that there's a high probability they will not be self-sufficient right away. All pops in a colony require the same goods to operate efficiently as they would have back home. Because colonies tend to be

[00:26:34 - 00:27:23] lower developed and have less population in them, you might have access to fewer goods, you could easily get yourself into a negative feedback loop where you don't have access to goods to construct new buildings. So, you cannot progress the development of a colony and people start to starve out. So, you might need to set up trade routes from back home to send goods to your colonies before they are able to become fully self-sufficient. This is why colonies can be a long-term investment in your

[00:26:59 - 00:27:43] future. It takes a while for the colonies to get going and then even once they've been created, you might need to supply them with food, resources, and money before they can even give you a return on your investment. That'll about bring this tutorial to a close. We learned a lot about your armies, your navies, logistics, and colonies. With that, you'll have the tools you'll need to expand in Europa Universalis 5.
