[00:00:00 - 00:01:03] Europa Universalis 5 will generate a representation of every single person alive in 1337. This is so many people it can actually be a little complex to figure out what they're doing. So, what do you need to know about population in EU5? Hello everyone, I am Benjamin Magnus and today me and little Loris here are going to be breaking down the core mechanics of population, culture, religion, language, geopolitics, and disease. One thing I'd like to address right before we get started is that during the production of

[00:00:32 - 00:01:28] these videos, I have been struck in by a dastardly disease, which makes me sound like Zap Brangan. I do apologize for any change in audio fidelity. This is episode number two in our tutorial series, and we highly recommend you check out episode 1 for more information about the basics of the UI if you haven't already. Furthermore, we do have all the information covered in this video timestamped down in the doobly-doo if you are looking for specific information. Today we are stepping into the nation of Aragon. And oh look, we

[00:01:00 - 00:02:05] can see the Tinto offices from here. In the UI top bar, you can see here that we have a population of around 1.5 million. That means at the start of the game, there are 1.465 million individual people living in our nation. Loris, can you bring out the chalkboard, please? Let's start by defining what a POP is. POP is an acronym and stands for part of population in Paradox games. A pop can be a single individual person or a pop can be millions of people. In EU5, the defining characteristics that make up a

[00:01:32 - 00:02:27] POP, are their culture, religion, societal class, and location. Diving down even deeper, pops will also have their own individual levels of satisfaction, which will represent how pleased they are with the current administration, and literacy, which is an important driver of research. Pops will also help drive your economy by demanding different goods. Without your pops, there would be no people to tax. There would be no workers for your buildings, manpower for your armies, and your colonies would never populate.

[00:02:00 - 00:02:55] Every system in EU5 ties back to your pops. And importantly, the decisions you make, like which buildings you build, in which locations, and what mechanical choices you are making as the player, will shape how your population evolves over time. We'll explore many of these interconnected systems throughout this guide, so don't worry if it's feeling a little overwhelming at this point. Let's start by examining Aragon's demography and building up from there. Let's start by talking about societal classes.

[00:02:28 - 00:03:28] Societal class in EU5 can be split into a large pyramid with nobles at the top followed by clerics, burgers, laborers, soldiers, peasants, tribesmen, and finally slaves. Typically, the more populous societal classes will be at the bottom of the pyramid, while the top of the pyramid will be home to less of your overall population. Pops will be assigned a societal class based on the job that they hold within your society. And societal classes are not static either. It is perfectly feasible for members of your population to promote

[00:02:58 - 00:03:55] through societal classes multiple times and go from being peasants to nobles. It all comes down to how you build your society. In EU5, you will be shaping your nation and its people on the location level. A location is the smallest individual piece of geography on the map. Let's look in more detail by clicking on the town of Terraona. We've defaulted into the locations infrastructure tab. Here on the left, we can see a breakdown of our different societal classes in this specific location. We have a bar here that

[00:03:27 - 00:04:31] represents their current level of employment. If we look at soldiers down here, we can see that we have,00 soldiers available for work. 1,000 of them are currently employed at a castle, leaving 100 unemployed. The blue bar is representing current level of employment and the green bar representing currently unemployed pops. Here we could see that wine is created in Terraona as our resource gathering operation. If we click on the wine button, we will build a new level of wine RGO and that will affect our workforce in Terraona. Now we

[00:03:59 - 00:04:57] can see that we have a deficit of 650 laborers. That is not necessarily a problem though. Pops can be promoted over time. Here we can see we have a surplus of 33,000 peasants and every month 14 of them will promote up into the laborer class. Something to note is that pops can demote as well over time. This will happen if their needs go unfulfilled for long periods of time. Back to what we were talking about though filling these jobs can also be handled through migration. If we take a look at our demography tab here, we can

[00:04:28 - 00:05:26] see that we have a migration attraction in Teragona of.56. Now, migration will change location to location based on many variables, such as the laws of your realm that might encourage or discourage certain pops to move about your nation. It is something to keep in mind though that migration is a tool that you can use to fill job vacancies. Now, unlike myself and Loris here, pops are not just a 2D abstraction of a job that is being performed in your nation. As we mentioned earlier, they each have their own culture and

[00:04:57 - 00:06:00] religion, as well as their job and their location. Let's zoom back out a little bit and take a look at the societies tab for a moment. You can access the societies tab by pressing F4 or by just clicking on it in your country panel. The first tab of our society panel is our culture. Here we can see the overall breakdown of cultures within your nation. Here we can see that Catalan is our primary culture. Araggones is an accepted culture. Anduzi, Spharti, and Gascon are tolerated cultures, and

[00:05:30 - 00:06:29] Sardinian and Castellian are discriminated cultures. There are several more cultures within our nation that are grayed out. We can see them by scrolling down. Because they make up less than 1% of our total population. We cannot interact with them directly as a culture. You may have noticed that when we hover over each culture, it will highlight on the map where that culture exists. Brighter green colors on the map represent those locations having a higher density of that culture in that location. In the information panel here,

[00:05:59 - 00:06:58] we have our primary culture. We have our common language. We have a pie chart of our cultures. We have our cultural tradition and cultural influence. When it comes to a culture war, we can think of these two as our cultural offense and our cultural defense. The assimilation rate into our culture. We currently have a negative modifier for being a spiritualist country. Accepted cultures. Higher levels of acceptance will make a pop of that culture happier. Here we could see the number of artists we can

[00:06:29 - 00:07:23] employ and our works of art in the country which can also be viewed here. Works of art and artists will tie into the cultural tradition and cultural influence of our cultures. How strong your primary culture is can impact many different mechanics in the games from assimilation to integration, spy network construction, diplomacy, and even sieges. We'll go into more detail about those culture wars later. Hovering over these two items will show you that a lot of the power of your culture is coming

[00:06:56 - 00:07:52] from locations, which is derived from the pops in those locations. Changing over to religion, we can see in this tab our nation's primary religion, our lurggical language, our religious unity, conversion rate, holy sites if there are any owned, our primary religious tolerance, our tolerance of heretics, and our tolerance of heathens. Depending on what religion your nation follows, you'll have a different religious tab here. Because we're Catholic, we have the Catholic interaction tab. And on the

[00:07:24 - 00:08:13] religion breakdown tab, you can simply see a breakdown of the religions in our nation. On the surface, it might be difficult to identify the various mechanics that a pop's religion will affect, but this will become more clear when we cover linguistics in a future tutorial. For now, it's just really good to know where you can find this information when you need to go looking for it. The final tab on our society panel is the people's tab. The people tab will give you a breakdown of all of

[00:07:48 - 00:08:50] the pops in your nation. We can see our largest pop are 50,000 Catalan peasants [music] that are Catholic and live in Barcelona. And our smallest pop is this guy. We can see our promotion speed, demotion speed, and total population. We have a breakdown of all of our classes, the number of characters that live in our nation, our total population growth, if there's any separatism in our nation, our migration modifiers, our monthly rebel growth, and our average literacy. These three indicators here will show

[00:08:19 - 00:09:18] you each POP's literacy rate, their access to goods, and their total satisfaction. And as it relates to POPs, you could check out the rebels tab. One of the things to notice is that each rebel movement will also have a number of people tied to it. So 156,000 Sunni Zealots might be something you need to take more seriously than 400 Lurian patriots. An army marches on its stomach and a starving peasant [music] doesn't do any work. So it is very important to keep an eye on the food situation in your

[00:08:52 - 00:09:51] nation. Food is a great place to start because it's the first port of call to understanding the needs of your population. Food is consumed through three different tiers. Tier one being local. Food that is produced in a location will then be consumed in that location. Any excess food from that location will be sent to the provincial stockpile. If the entire province is still in the negative, it will then attempt to buy food from the market. If it fails to do so, your pops will start to starve. and starving pops is a bad

[00:09:21 - 00:10:16] thing for you and your people. Each of these tabs is a province in your nation. This number here is an aggregate of all of the locally produced food. Any excess is being stockpiled and then sent to the market. You can sell food as well. Any negatives are being purchased from the market before consuming your stockpile. Something to note is you can increase the amount of food stockpiled with buildings. If we open up one of these tabs, we can see the breakdown of where all this food is going and coming from.

[00:09:49 - 00:10:41] The percentages are the total amount of modifiers affecting food production. Higher modifiers means more food being produced. These numbers are the total amounts of production and consumption. These buttons will bring you to a build menu that will show you all buildings that are food related that can be built in that location. And this button here will show you if there is a food RGO in the location. And clicking it will increase the size of the RGO. As you can see, even with a high modifier, without

[00:10:15 - 00:11:19] the food RGO, you won't be producing much food. An ideal place to efficiently make food is sig because it is a rural location. It has a high food production modifier and it has a food RGO. One thing to keep in mind is that food as a resource and food as food is slightly different. If we take a look at wheat, you can see that every source of wheat will produce eight food. If we take a look at fish, every source of fish will create five food. So wheat is a more efficient resource than fish if you're just trying

[00:10:47 - 00:11:40] to create as much food as possible. Furthermore, other RGOs that have a primarily industrial output like wool from sheep will also produce food as a secondary resource. Something to note is that any peasants working in subsistence agriculture will also be producing food. This means that rural locations will often be self-sufficient when it comes to food production versus consumption. It's when you add your towns and cities into the mix that math comes into the equation. This also means that choosing

[00:11:13 - 00:12:10] where to urbanize is a strategic choice that you will have to make. Cities add a large negative modifier to the food produced in a location. So building your cities where your food is being produced is often not a great idea. But placing a city might be strategic- minded, not just efficiency-minded. So you might need to think about where you're going to supply that city's food from. Will there be enough rural locations with foods to supply a growing city? or will you have to import that food from out of

[00:11:42 - 00:12:36] town? And if you do, are those trade routes vulnerable? You can see that we do have some provinces that are running negatives. That's not actually causing us any problems right now because the food that they need is being bought on the market. If we go back to our economic panel, you can see that we are buying a very small amount of food for 0.48 duckets. We can get rid of that expenditure by increasing food production, or we could just rely on the fact that we can buy food on the market. And on the other side of the coin, if

[00:12:09 - 00:13:09] you have a huge surplus of food, that could be sold for profit on the market as well. Starvation is definitely something you want to avoid as it has some extremely deadly penalties like neg 5% population growth and minus 50% population capacity, which will lead to a rapid decline in population either from people dying or moving away to avoid a famine. Having just enough food is also a risky proposition, especially when armies are taken into account. a net negative province that buys from surplus within a market can easily be

[00:12:39 - 00:13:35] thrown into starvation if heavy military activity in the area consumes all of the food. So growing more food than you think you need is usually advisable. Like we mentioned before, you can build buildings like the granary which will increase the amount of food surplus stored in a location. This can help your population flourish because you can get bonuses to population growth by having things like a large food storage in a location and cheap food available in that location. Now that we have begun to

[00:13:07 - 00:14:12] grow food and our population, it's important to talk about population capacity. Population capacity is tied directly to a location's terrain and geographic features. Its topography, climate, and vegetation all directly influence how many people a location can support. Perhaps one of the most important features is vegetation, which provides a baseline value for pop capacity. If we take a look at farmland, we can see that it provides an enormous 100,000 population capacity, which is double the next best vegetation, which

[00:13:40 - 00:14:49] is grasslands. You can also see it provides a bonus to food production, which we just looked at, and maximum RGO size, which is how many levels of an RGO you can stack on a single location. We can check the population cap for any location simply by clicking on the location and hovering over the population number. We can see right here that Sigis has a population capacity of 191,000 and where those numbers are coming from. So, why does this matter? Well, population capacity is also a driver of population

[00:14:14 - 00:15:22] growth. While you are under your max capacity, you get a population growth modifier of 0.2%. Which scales down as you approach maximum capacity. Hitting population capacity will completely stop popped growth and provide additional malicees to migration and increase pop demotion speed. But if you are trying to purposely encourage migration, overpop populating a location would certainly help. Now, we have talked about migration a few times, so let's delve deeper into that. You can grow a location's population by bringing in

[00:14:48 - 00:15:46] pops from elsewhere. Pops will migrate within a market, preferring areas close to them and moving from areas of low migration to areas of high migration, if it's legal, that is. For example, peasants might be blocked from moving in a feudal society if they are not given the rights to do so. Luckily, our commoner's estate in Aragon does have free mobility of peasantry. But that brings us to the next question. What makes an area more appealing to a pop? Migration attraction is something that

[00:15:18 - 00:16:13] you can affect. Here we have a breakdown in Barcelona of all of the factors affecting our migration attraction. Being a market center, being a capital, having high development and high prosperity are all contributing factors, including buildings like cathedrals. Market prices and availability of land will also impact it. So, it might be a good idea to try to encourage migration by lowering the cost of goods. One thing we just mentioned that we should go into greater detail about is development.

[00:15:45 - 00:16:42] Clicking on any location, we can find development here. Development is a measurement of how cultivated or utilized the land in a location is. Higher development will allow more pups to live at a location and allow you to exploit the resources to a greater degree. You can see that high development has a laundry list of positive modifiers. And here we could find the ones we were just talking about, population capacity and migration attraction, which both go up as development increases, meaning that a

[00:16:13 - 00:17:10] large city will have a tendency to want to grow. Again, you'll want to manage this carefully. If you pull everyone out of the fields too soon, that shiny new mega city might just starve out. You could increase development in an area in a number of ways, most notably through cabinet actions, but the main source of development growth is prosperity. Prosperity will be different for every location and is listed here. You can see that in Barcelona, our prosperity is low and will give a number of negative

[00:16:42 - 00:17:43] malices. I found some high prosperity over here in Italy and you can see that it will increase our migration attraction, monthly development, population growth and character life expectancy. Prosperity will build up very slowly over time. So it will take a while for high prosperity to really acrue. Conversely, negative prosperity can happen very quickly. low pop satisfaction, outbreaks of diseases, being sieged by an occupying army, a blockade, and if your location is being looted by an enemy army will all

[00:17:12 - 00:18:14] negatively impact prosperity very quickly. As you can see, the list of negatives from low prosperity and the list of positives from high prosperity are not equal one to one. Low prosperity builds up quickly and is devastating. High prosperity builds up slowly and gives small bonuses. So, if you do get an area to be very prosperous, you'll want to protect it with everything you have. Now, for some of those more military-minded folks out there, you may have noticed that this is a viable war strategy as well. You may not have the

[00:17:44 - 00:18:46] staying power to siege down enemy castles, but maybe some smaller, faster hitand-run tactics will negatively impact an enemy's ability to fund a war. Now it's time to look at POP satisfaction and of course the consequences of low POP satisfaction. Satisfaction simply measures how happy your POPs are with the administration. As you can see, we are on the population satisfaction map mode. This will show an average in every location of the satisfaction of the pops in that location. The number we see on the

[00:18:14 - 00:19:09] screen is an average. Now, each pop does have its own satisfaction, but all of the pops living in a location will have their satisfaction added together and averaged out for this score. Hovering over any location will give you a breakdown of how that number is being calculated. The four biggest factors influencing a pop satisfaction are usually culture, religious tolerance, estate satisfaction, and whether the pop has had their needs met. Low satisfaction can have some pretty serious consequences, so you generally

[00:18:42 - 00:19:49] want to avoid it. One thing I do want to point out is that we are looking at Barcelona here with a very high average satisfaction of 92.31, but we have a monthly prosperity malice of negative0.01. You may ask yourself why a high satisfaction is giving a negative modifier. The way this works is that at 100% satisfaction, there is no monthly malice to prosperity, meaning you will be getting all of the bonuses of the monthly tick. The lower your satisfaction goes below 100% will increase the malice thus lowering

[00:19:15 - 00:20:15] prosperity. So if we go to an area with lower satisfaction like over here we can see that the very low satisfaction is giving a increased malice to prosperity. Let's say you're trying to focus on development and you want to get that flat bonus imparted by high prosperity. You'll want to work on the satisfaction of the population in that location and try to get it as high as possible. That might mean building new buildings which create a new good, importing goods to meet a need, or perhaps granting an estate privilege to

[00:19:46 - 00:20:54] make the estate happier. If a pop with low satisfaction falls below the rebel threshold, they will begin contributing to a rebel movement. The aggregate satisfaction of a location does not inform rebel contribution. A small religious minority, for instance, can fuel a movement across an entire nation, even in high satisfaction areas near your capital. Rebel progress can also be fueled by money from uncollected taxes due to lack of control in a location. Control is a powerful modifier that radiates outwards from your capital and

[00:20:20 - 00:21:24] represents the state's ability to exert its dominion on an individual location. Low control means a portion of the potential tax base is going uncollected or being funneled to rebellious dissident. Higher control also makes pop conversion and assimilation easier and directly affects pop promotion speed. In basic terms, control dictates how much you can pull out of a location and how much you can influence into it. And tying back into what we were just talking about, low satisfaction ruins your ability to control a location. The

[00:20:52 - 00:21:45] important numbers to look at here are your current control, your monthly change, and your maximum control. Current is where we are now. Monthly is where we're going and maximum control is the highest possible control we can have in that location based on all of our modifiers. And here you can see that average satisfaction impacts maximum control. We'll be talking about control a lot through the tutorial series. And one of the things to keep in mind is that control can be increased in the

[00:21:18 - 00:22:16] game through a cabinet action. Here we could see we have a high admin character doing a admin focused task. So he's doing a good job. He's increasing control in Catalonia. We also recommend that you increase control is one of the very first things you do when you start a new game. So, if low satisfaction means lower max control and low control means pop decline and stagnation, how do we increase satisfaction? As we've hinted at, a large portion of your pop satisfaction is derived from

[00:21:47 - 00:22:47] their associated estate satisfaction. For each estate satisfaction higher than 50, you gain two satisfaction for each pop in that estate. So, it's a powerful factor in modifying the satisfaction of your pops. Since peasants often represent the highest share of your population by sheer numbers, strategies like lowering taxes and granting privileges to the commoners are great tools to increase overall satisfaction, as upsetting the nobles rarely moves the needle as much considering there are so

[00:22:18 - 00:23:19] few of them physically present in a location. Nataloris, you put that down. We'll need it later, comrade. Now, this doesn't mean we can just piss off the nobles. It just means that they won't drive a location's satisfaction that much. This is the 1300s. The nobles still have a huge amount of political influence. Control will also propagate out through infrastructure. That means building a road network or maritime presence along your coastline. So, how else would we go about increasing

[00:22:48 - 00:23:43] satisfaction? By tending to our population's needs. A quick way to try to find pressure points for an estate is to simply hover over the estate on the UI here, lock your tool tip, and then check their monthly expenses. Lowering the cost of goods at the top of this list will increase estate satisfaction by lowering the amount of money they have to spend on their needs. You could see that our commoners are spending a huge amount of their money on livestock in Barcelona. Creating more livestock

[00:23:15 - 00:24:10] RGOs's will increase the supply and lower the price. Now, different estates will have different needs. Our commoners are mostly concerned with getting their daily meal. But if we check our nobility, they're mostly concerned with luxuries, fine cloth, and finding that next glitter hoof. Something to keep in mind is that a higher tier pop will consume way more resources than a lower tier pop. This is a trade-off. It's good because it creates demand in your market, creating profitable business

[00:23:43 - 00:24:36] opportunities. It is bad in that if you cannot meet the demand, that will drive a shortage, which will decrease satisfaction. Let's check to see if there are any unfulfilled needs for our pops here in Siges. An easy way to see what needs are not being met in a location are to simply hover over this button right here. You could see near the top of our list, fine cloth and livestock are in great need. We saw a hint of this when we were looking at the estate satisfaction. The nobility was spending a lot of money on fine cloth

[00:24:10 - 00:25:00] because we don't have a lot of fine cloth and the commoners were spending a lot of money on livestock because the supply is low. If we want to quickly try to remedy these problems, we can click on the Barcelona market here. There's a lot of different ways to sort this information. But if we sort by goods balance, we can find what items we have the biggest deficit in, and we can try to fix that problem. These three buttons will allow us to address the situation. The first button will bring us to a

[00:24:35 - 00:25:30] panel sorted by buildings that are applicable to this item. The second one will take us to the RGO panel applicable to this item, and the third button will allow us to import that good into the market. Needs and demography are just one piece of the population puzzle. As we mentioned earlier, culture and religion also play a huge part when it comes to satisfaction. Let's start with religion. And for that, we need to navigate to the religious society tab that we saw before. On the right hand side here, we can see our religious

[00:25:02 - 00:26:06] tolerances. For every point of religious tolerance, a pop gains 5% satisfaction. So, anybody we consider a heathen will have 25% satisfaction. It is notable that religious opinions can vary even among different religions within the same category. Here we can see that both Sunniism and Judaism are heathen faiths in our nation. But we have worse opinions of Sunniism and they have worse opinions of Catholicism. This religious opinion provides additional modifiers to satisfaction as well as affecting the

[00:25:34 - 00:26:42] ease of diplomacy with nations whose primary religion is of that faith. It's also worth noting that our clergy estate gets a massive bonus to estate satisfaction equal to 10% of our religious unity number. Our current religious unity is 87.45%. So we can see that we have a clergy estate satisfaction of plus 8.74%. So how do we go about improving our religious satisfaction scores? Well, there are two clear ways to go about this. Either we live in a harmonious state, a tolerant society where we

[00:26:08 - 00:27:14] accept everyone equally, or we attempt to force everyone to conform by converting their religion. Converting religion is something that will happen naturally over time based on a number of modifiers, but can also be gooseed by a cabinet action. Do be warned though, converting pops will enrage them, and you run the risk of rebellion when doing so. You could change how tolerant your society is and how powerful your conversions are through laws and societal values. Religion and our clergy satisfaction will also have a major

[00:26:41 - 00:27:40] impact on our technology. Here we can see we have our lurggical language and it is Latin. This is again another pop-driven mechanic that grants a flat research bonus based on the power of this language. Looking at the map, we can see that we share the lurggical language of Latin with most of Europe. We can band together and all increase the power of Latin which gives us all a bigger research bonus. However, most of our research is coming only from the collective clerics of our nation as most of the countries only have this as a

[00:27:11 - 00:28:13] contribution to language power. In this way, we can sort of think of Latin as a wide language sharing many members and Japanese as a tall language entirely [music] contained in a smaller number of nations. Linguistics is where culture and language begin to cross paths. As like your lurggical language interplays with your clergy satisfaction, your court language affects your noble satisfaction. In fact, linguistics affects all the states. Having a court language that is powerful caters to the nobles. Having it be the common language

[00:27:42 - 00:28:41] increases satisfaction of the peasants. The clergy preferred to be the same as the lurggical language and having it be the same as the market capital gives a bonus to trade capacity and burgers. Culture has strong similarities to religion regarding satisfaction. In EU5, there are multiple levels of cultural acceptance, each affecting satisfaction. We've covered these a little bit before. Tolerated cultures will give a 5% satisfaction bonus. Accepted cultures 10% and your primary culture has a large

[00:28:11 - 00:29:09] 25% bonus. Much like religion, cultural opinion also impacts satisfaction and diplomacy. If we take a look at our accepted cultures tool tip here, we can see that we are currently using 1.39 of two cultural capacity. Where that 1.39 is currently coming from is right here. And where the maximum is coming from is listed right here. It's coming from our kingdom rank and our advancements. So, this number will go up over time. If we take a look at Andaluzzi right here, you can see that we're currently using 0.65

[00:28:40 - 00:29:40] 65 of our cultural capacity cap to have them as a tolerated culture. If we would like to promote them to an accepted culture, it would raise that to 1.96, a difference of 1.31. If we add that to our current accepted culture usage, we will be over our cap. Now, you are allowed to do that, but you will be taking many negative modifiers to your nation if you do so. You can also demote cultures in your nation, and if you so choose, you can promote a new culture to be your primary. Generally speaking,

[00:29:10 - 00:30:03] cultures that view our primary culture in a favorable light will take less capacity to tolerate or accept. If we want to make sure our pop satisfaction is high, we'll need to make sure those pops fall into an accepted culture. As we've mentioned before, your culture has these two stats, your cultural tradition and your cultural influence. When it comes to assimilating cultures, cultural influence acts as your culture's offense, and it is compared to the cultural tradition of the culture you're

[00:29:37 - 00:30:41] trying to assimilate. So, if you're planning on trying to assimilate a lot of other cultures, bolstering your cultural influence is key. And if your culture is under attack by enemy forces, cultural tradition is key. So, both of them, handin hand, will make a strong culture. These two forces impact many other aspects of the game, including integration speed, spy networks, diplomacy, and even sieges. Notable sources of influence are prestige, literacy of nobles, and art. Throughout EU5 and especially after the Renaissance

[00:30:09 - 00:31:08] begins, nations can employ artists, which are characters who will generate works of art. Creating art will give us cultural influence. Owning works of art will give us cultural tradition. Higher influence will increase the rate at which our artists can make art. It will increase at a flat rate, but decrease by a percentage and eventually reach an equilibrium. We can see here that the crown of Aragon can support one artist from being a kingdom country rank, but we have none currently hired. Events

[00:30:39 - 00:31:35] throughout the game might produce an artist for a nation, or we might be able to promote one through a parliamentary action, but most of the time we'll simply be able to hire an artist for money. Art that is created by your artist can increase pop promotion speed, conversion, and assimilation in locations where it's kept. And finally, they also increase institution growth, which can be a critical advantage if you stack all your artwork up in your capital or other notable location, allowing you to get institutions up and

[00:31:06 - 00:32:14] running more quickly. In EU5, there are three types of owned territory: conquered, integrated, and core. We can look more in depth at the integration map mode for this. Green is our core territory. This one yellow location is integrated. The areas with the stripes through them are core territories not owned by us. Red over here in Sardinia is our conquered territory. And the striped red area is a province in the process of integration. You can see that our conquered areas have debuffs to pop conversion speed,

[00:31:42 - 00:32:48] pop assimilation, max control, garrison growth, and has a huge amount of separatism. The tool tip is a little different on the area being integrated. You can see in our breakdown, it'll be done February 1st of 1354. And you can see that our cultural influence versus the Sardinian cultural tradition is giving us a bonus of 30%. So, we'll be able to integrate faster if we have a stronger cultural influence. The fully integrated but not a core location has smaller debuffs, and our core location has only buffs. There are

[00:32:15 - 00:33:15] two key requirements that must be met for a location to be considered a core. The location must be integrated, which can happen naturally over time and be sped up through a cabinet action, and it has to have a majority of its pops as an accepted or primary culture. Cors get a massive 20% bonus to max control, making them much more profitable locations. Additionally, the pop growth in core locations will only be of accepted or primary cultures, meaning core locations will shift demographies towards primary

[00:32:45 - 00:33:41] and accepted cultures over time, which of course will have a positive feedback loop on average satisfaction. Now that we've discussed cores, we've covered most of the fundamental features of pops and locations. So before we discuss how they'll begin to affect more complex systems such as the economy, let's recap. We've learned about pop growth and how it is informed by food, prosperity, and population capacity, which itself is informed by the terrain features of a location. The pops within

[00:33:13 - 00:34:20] a location inform that location's satisfaction, which allows it to be prosperous, and that prosperity helps to drive development, which affects a multitude of things. Further, the demographies of the pops within a location allow integrated locations to become cores, positively affecting control. And that more control allows us to manipulate and extort tax our provinces for more resources. Now let's add the final layer of pop mechanics and look at how they influence the economy and politics of our nation. The

[00:33:46 - 00:34:41] demography tab in any location shows us population growth, migration, and the rates of assimilation and conversion. Let's take a look at the Araggones capital of Barcelona. Most prominently, we'll see the breakdown of professions which will represent pop social classes and dictate what kinds of buildings they can work in. Each pop will belong to an estate like noble, clergy, and burgers, while peasants, laborers, soldiers, and slaves all belong to the commoner estate. Do remember that estate

[00:34:14 - 00:35:22] satisfaction informs the satisfaction of its constituent pops. Here, with an enormous proportion of peasants, a 5% increase in peasant satisfaction would increase their pop satisfaction by 10%. Estate power, however, is not proportional to pop count. A single noble will have 1,250% more power than any commoner. Here we can see that the estates receive a portion of the tax base based on pops in locations. Currently, the best way to see how many leveies a location produces is through the armies tab and hovering

[00:34:48 - 00:35:44] over the raise levies button. You can then hover over the number of troops coming from a location to see the demographic breakdown and the type of units they'll become. Heading back to Barcelona's infrastructure tab earlier we mentioned that one of the primary ways you can adjust key modifiers in EU5 is through building buildings. In the infrastructure tab you can see our pops by profession again, but next to them are all the buildings in this location sorted by the profession of pops required to operate them. We've covered

[00:35:16 - 00:36:05] this before. The number on the right is the total amount of pops in that location in that profession. The number on the left is the current number of pops available [music] for work. If we queue up a few buildings, we can see these numbers change. If the number goes negative, that means we do not have enough pops in that location to fulfill the roles, and new pops will need to be promoted into the role. So, creating vacant jobs, is a good way to encourage pop promotion. A building's output,

[00:35:41 - 00:36:41] which could be either a produced good or maybe a modifier, is adjusted depending on the building's employment. An unemployed building provides no benefit and an underemployed building is less effective. In this way, POPs are not only necessary for buildings to work. These pops will also need to be qualified to operate that building. So, anytime you build a building, you get possible professions equal to the employment required to operate that [music] building. Meaning, if you build 100 burger buildings that employ 200

[00:36:10 - 00:37:12] pops, then you would add 20,000 possible professions to burgers. Here we can see that we have many burgers available for employment. One of the reasons for this is that Barcelona is a city giving us this list of modifiers which includes possible burgers. We'll go deeper in urbanization soon, but it is worth noting that these possible promotions once filled with available pops will increase both the power and tax base share of that associated estate. If we hover over one of the POPs in the infrastructure panel here, we can see

[00:36:42 - 00:37:35] the speed at which POPs will promote over time to fulfill building needs. And if you would like to see more information about POP promotion, you can just hover over the number here, and we get a breakdown of where these numbers are coming from. Notably, not all Pops promote at the same speed, and higher tier pops promote much slower than lower tier pops. One thing to remember is that pop promotion early game can be fairly slow. One of the things on the list that you can directly control the most easily

[00:37:08 - 00:38:08] is stability. High stability will lead to a faster promotion speed, but at times it can be hard to keep high stability because of massive historical plagues that might be around the corner. Let's take a look at some of the other factors that can impact promotion speed. We'll start with control. Down here in Valencia, we have a control of 49%. That means Valencia will have a massive 51% penalty to pop promotion speed. If we didn't have positive stability right now, we would even drop below the base

[00:37:38 - 00:38:34] promotion rate. Looking at the control map mode here, we can see that if we want to build urban centers with higher tier pops, it's going to be far easier to achieve that near the capital. The literacy of pops in a location also gives us pop promotion speed bonuses. Though important for promotion, literacy's most vital function is giving a percentage modifier to research based on your nation's average literacy. You can find the nation's average literacy through the advances panel. Finally,

[00:38:06 - 00:39:17] works of art increase population growth at the location that they are displayed at. This modifier increases depending on how well-known the art piece is. Finally, if pops do not have enough capacity or their jobs disappear, they will demote at a base rate of 100 per month. Starvation creates a massive problem by stripping you of valuable promotions rapidly. But it also helps solve the food problem by forcing upper class pops who consume more food to demote to lower tiers faster than poorer societal classes. So, so far in this

[00:38:42 - 00:39:46] video, we've talked constantly about all the intertwined mechanics and how they relate to each other. This map mode here is location rank. And in it, we can see the three different ranks that are available: rural, towns, and cities. Rural locations have a pop growth modifier, which means that in theory, they will have the best pop growth, but they won't be able to store that much food because the granary buildings can only be built in towns and cities. Another bonus to the rural locations is they give you a 100% RGO

[00:39:14 - 00:40:18] level modifier, which means you can build way more RGO levels in rural locations. So, it might not be a great idea to urbanize a gold mine because then you wouldn't be able to mine as much gold. So keeping those high value RGOs as rural locations has its benefits. Next we have towns which give a variety of bonuses and are generally required for all burger focused economic buildings which as the game progresses will occupy an increasingly large percentage of your economy. You can upgrade any rural location to a town at

[00:39:46 - 00:40:44] a base cost of 500 duckets. Base cost for upgrading a town to a city is 2,000 duckets which is quite expensive. It is worth mentioning that when it comes to choosing between creating urban environments and rural ones that many buildings will be affected by your choices. You'll notice when developing your population and your locations in EU5, there are many choices to be made. Some of them are dictated by your economy, others by geography, and sometimes by the pops themselves. And that's kind of the point. You now have a

[00:40:15 - 00:41:11] good foundation of how the living world works. And in the coming guides, we'll build on that foundation and give you the tools to master EU5. Before we get moving, there's a final thing that we should cover, and that's death. Your pups will die. And whether that be through war, starvation, or maybe disease, eventually, they'll all be removed from their digital plane and vanish into the little shoe box under Yan's desk. As a good example of how pups can die, let's discuss the Black

[00:40:43 - 00:41:40] Death. The bubanic plague, which will terrorize your early game, kills the rich and the poor alike. Here we could see the early stages of the plague have wiped out our burgers and our soldiers. But people from every class have started to die. These buildings now have vacancies, which means building new ones won't do anything as the old buildings and the new buildings will now no longer have pops to service them. So, what can we do to address this situation? One of the first things we can do is build

[00:41:12 - 00:42:11] disease resistance buildings. These will have a small impact and may edge you out over your neighbors, but they will not be able to stop the plague. For all diseases in the game, you can track information about them here. You could see that the bubanic plague so far has killed 20 million people, 489,000 of them in Aragon. We also have the black death situation panel, which has a number of actions you can take to try to mitigate the black death. Something to note about diseases is that as the disease spreads, the resistance to that

[00:41:41 - 00:42:43] disease will grow as well. Once the resistance hits 100% the disease can no longer affect that location. Another thing to remember is that diseases will reduce prosperity which is important and the bubanic plague and the great pestilence specifically come with some particularly nasty modifiers. So if we can't mitigate the losses, something that we can do is to try to extract more resources out of our hinterlands. And we can do that by increasing control, by increasing proximity, by building roads.

[00:42:12 - 00:43:19] The roads will decrease proximity cost which will in turn increase control which in turn will help solve the qualification problems. The higher levels of control will lead to faster promotions. Another thing we can do is to try to avoid qualifications by working at a less efficient manner by building villages. Villages are generally less powerful than urban buildings and are built in rural locations. But they do have some key advantages. They employ peasants. No promotions required. The market village is a good example of this

[00:42:46 - 00:43:40] because you have a multitude of production methods to produce different finished goods. So, that about sums up everything you need to know about the population mechanics in EU5. Of course, there are many more mechanical layers to explore in future guides, but this should get the wheels turning on what to do when you're playing the game. In the next video, we'll be breaking down the economy and trade so you can start balancing a budget and raking in those duckets.
