Source URL: https://eu5.paradoxwikis.com/Jargon
Source Date: 2025-11-25

This article is
timeless
and should be accurate for any version of the game.
Europa Universalis V, and communities surrounding it, has its own
jargon
, including slang terms and acronyms.
Acronyms
[
edit
|
edit source
]
Here are some of the common acronyms in the game and in discussions surrounding it:
AAR
After action report
- a player's recounting of their EU5 game. For more detail, see the
AAR section
AE
Aggressive Expansion
, the current amount of hatred towards your nation for expanding, this number varies per nation. For more detail, see
Antagonism
AI
Artificial intelligence
- What controls all nations that are not being played by humans
BYZ
Byzantine Empire
- also referred to as the ERE (Eastern Roman Empire) or BZE. Played mainly for a challenge.
CB
Casus belli
- Latin for "case for war", these justify war demands, reducing the cost or consequences of declaring war and making demands in a peace treaty.
CTD
Crash To Desktop
- Frequently used in patch notes
DHE
Dynamic Historical Events
(events tied to specific tags).
DLC
Downloadable content
- A package made available by Paradox that adds more game mechanics, music, and other features to the game. Compare with mod.
DOTF
Defender of the Faith
- a nation that is the defender of other countries sharing its national religion
DOW
Declaration of war
; can be used as a verb ("I'm going to DOW you, Otto!")
EoC
Emperor of China
EU5
Europa Universalis 5
- The game this wiki is about
FOW
Fog of War
- Prevents nations from seeing parts of the map they do not either border, or have an
army
or
navy
adjacent to
GB
Great Britain
- A
formable country
in the British Isles
GH
Golden Horde
- A steppe horde
GM
Game-master
- A leader or organizer of a multiplayer game.
HRE
Holy Roman Empire
- An international organization in Central Europe
MP
Manpower
or
multiplayer
OOS
Out of Sync
- A notorious desynchronisation error that occurs in multiplayer, requires the game to be loaded again. Occurs frequently in patch notes
OP
Overpowered
or, on the forums, the
Original Post(er)
of a thread
OPM
One province minor
- The smallest countries in the game, consisting of only a single
province
PC
Personal computer
, or, more specific to EU5,
papal controller
PLC
Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth
PTI
Permanent terra incognita
; also called Wasteland; areas that cannot be explored or colonized. e.g., deserts, dense jungles, tundra, mountains and glacial expanses
PU
Personal union
- A union between two nations due to having the same
monarch
on both thrones; can be used as a verb ("Don't know how I did it, but I PU'd
Ming
!")
RM
Royal marriage
-
A Marriage between notable characters.
RNG
Random number generator
- a mathematical subsystem that generates a random number. Used to determine chances for events, battle results, and other game features that use randomization of results to any degree.
ROTW
Rest of the world
- Generally refers to all areas outside Europe
TI
Terra incognita
- Parts of the world that a nation has no knowledge of. An example would be the New World prior to Western exploration
TO
Teutonic Order
TPM
Two/three province minor
- Small countries in the game, consisting of only two or three provinces
WAD
Works/working as designed
- this acronym means that the thing in question is wrongly considered a bug and is actually intentional
WC
World conquest
- Taking over every inhabitable province on the map; often a goal for players; for others, an ahistorical outcome
WE
War exhaustion
- How tired your nation is of its recent conflicts
Slang
[
edit
|
edit source
]
Here are some of the common slang terms in the game and in discussions surrounding it:
ADM
Character's administrative skill
Arty
Artillery
Badboy
The accumulation of
antagonism
Bird
Force-closing the game. If done in Ironman mode this closes the game without saving it, allowing the player to savescum anything since the last auto save. From jokingly pretending to distract the game into not noticing that you're cheating ("Look, a bird!").
Blob
A large nation that tends to get larger over time unless checked. Named after how such large nations' expansions can leave them with irregular borders, resembling blobs of paint.
Carpet siege
Detaching small armies from the main army to occupy a huge number of enemy provinces and end wars faster.
Cav
Cavalry
Core
Used as a verb, to make a province a
core
province. ("How did France core Venice?")
Also used to reference a nations fully incorporated territory. ("Paris is a Core of France.")
A nation can have cores on unowned provinces, granting the Reconquest CB ("France has a core on Maine.")
(Country) Can Into Space
to make a country succeed far beyond expectations. Applied to the
AI
when it turns OPM countries into blobs. One of the
achievements
, "Poland Can Into Space", is earned by completing all the tech levels as Poland. (A takeoff on the
Polandball
meme.)
Clay
Territory, often a country's "rightful" land. Also a takeoff from Polandball.
DIP
Character's diplomatic skill
Dip Rep
Diplomatic reputation
Daycare
Refers to the
Holy Roman Empire
. Usually from the emperor's perspective, it refers to constantly having to look after the small Germanic states in the empire and trying to keep them in order.
Diplo-annex
Diplomatic annexation
– A way to peacefully incorporate a vassal state
Doomstack/Deathstack
An extremely large enemy force
Feeding
Short for
vassal feeding
.
God King/Sultan/Emperor etc.
A monarch with very good stats. This is considering that people do not get such high numbers too often.
Hugbox
Large or unbreaking multiplayer alliances that tend to stagnate games. Can also be used as a verb "Hugboxing"
Inf
Infantry
MIL
Character's military skill
Yuansplosion
Yuan
releasing a lot of countries through rebels
Min/Maxing
more or less marked tendency for a player to optimize every aspect of its runs. Can involve use of "birding" as well as pausing to think while playing, or even strategical plannification, information collection with test runs or community resources studying before actually playing.
Mod
A software package that modifies the game, written by the player community. Compare with DLC.
Nuke
The use of an exploit. ("My nuke for this playthrough is the mission exploit.")
Otto
The
Ottoman Empire
Savescumming
Reloading earlier saves when something goes wrong in order to set things right. Often considered a negative trait; impossible to do if Ironman is activated (except by
birding
, q.v.).
Shell
Short for vassal shelling, which involves surrounding a nation with an outer shell of vassals.
Snake
An elongated and sinuously shaped nation, usually only one province wide
Stab
Short for
stability
Stab hit
A drop in stability.
Stack
An army, a group of regiments
Stackwipe
Situation where all remaining regiments of an army are killed instantly. Can either happen at the start of the battle if the army has no morale or is outnumbered 10:1 or during the battle if their morale reaches 0 before they can retreat and they are outnumbered 2:1 or after the battle if there is nowhere for them to retreat.
Timmy
The
Timurids
Vassal swarm
A large number of subjects of one country that must be fought through in addition to their overlord. Often refers to the massive amount of troops produced by the members of the HRE. Allow to wage wars without doing anything by oneself.
Vulture
Another word for scavenging
Wardec
The act of declaring war / being declared war upon.
Warmonger
Describes players (rarely AI-controlled countries) that constantly declare wars, sometimes even several at once, for the sole purpose of conquering even more land. These countries are rarely at peace.
Whack-a-mole
Dealing with constant rebellions.
AAR
[
edit
|
edit source
]
After Action Reports
(
AARs
) are threads posted to the EU5 forums or a personal web site or blog written by players about their ongoing games. They can be written from the game player's personal point of view, or can be written from a fictitious narrative perspective, like a serialized novel. Some writers also blend the two elements, going from a metagame discussion to a fictitious narrative set in their game's alternate history world.
Player Point of View
: "I had a rough time as Austria this last session. It started when Ulm, that darned
OPM
, suddenly brought in half the
HRE
against me when I declared war on it. In all my playthroughs, this was the first time I ever was faced with such a nasty coalition. Before I knew it, not only was I facing the coalition, but the
Ottoman Empire
decided to make a
DOW
on me while I was in the thick of it!"
Fictitious Narrative
: "The Emperor sniffed offendedly at the ambassador of Ulm, who stood resolutely defiant regardless of the withering glance directed at him, 'What do you mean that the Archbishop refuses to accede to my demands? You realize that I shall have to invoke my powers to have him removed as an Elector!' Yet the ambassador shocked the court with his retort, 'If that is the sort of tyranny Your Imperial Majesty wishes to promulgate upon his vassals, then perhaps it is time for another Prince to rule in his stead!' He further shocked the court with this revelation, 'Know this: that Bohemia stands with us. As does Saxony, and Bavaria, and Brandenburg and more! If you dare so much as move against our borders, the entire continent shall rise against you!' And yet, it was too late. For the regiments had already crossed the Ulm frontier. War, a great war indeed, was now inevitable."
Players can include screen shots from their games, maps, period art, and other elements to add depth to their reports.
References
[
edit
|
edit source
]
Retrieved from "
https://eu5.paradoxwikis.com/index.php?title=Jargon&oldid=19272
"